.TH DICOM2SCN 1 "Dec 2010" "dicom2scn 2010.3" "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
dicom2scn \- medical image conversion

.SH SYNOPSIS
.TS
l l.
dicom2scn	[ \fB-b\fR \fIframe\fR ] [ \fB-e\fR \fIframe\fR ] [ \fB-r\fR ]
	[ \fB-n#\fR ] [ \fB-d\fR] [-\fB-xa\fR] [ \fB-i\fR ] \fIinputfile\fR [ \fIoutputfile\fR ]

dicom2scn	\fB-h\fR

dicom2scn	\fB--help\fR
.TE

.SH DESCRIPTION
dicom2scn converts sequences of 2D DICOM image files, or a 3D multiframe DICOM file, to
the SCN volume format (see
.BR scn (5)
). It has been reported to work with DICOM sequences from the following scanners: 

.nf
Elscint Prestige (MR)
Philips Achieva (MR)
Philips Gyroscan (MR)
Toshiba Aquilion (CT)
.fi

But it is likely to properly convert DICOM files from most scanners.

.SH DICOM NAMING
For multiframe DICOM files (entire 3D study in a single file), usually only inputfile and outputfile
are required, without additional options.

When importing studies that are split through several 2D files,
all DICOM slices belonging to a study should be in a same
directory, named with a fixed prefix and a numeric suffix, e.g.:

.nf
SOME_PATIENT1
SOME_PATIENT2
(...)
SOME_PATIENT162
.fi

The
.I inputfile
parameter can be any slice filename (e.g.:
.I /some/directory/SOME_PATIENT85
) or the path to a directory that contains
only DICOM files. If no
.I outputfile
is given, the conversion output (if any) is written
to
.I dicom.scn

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-b frame"
begins the conversion attempt at the frame-th slice. Applies to sequences of 2D files only.
.IP "-e frame"
ends the conversion attempt at the frame-th slice. Applies to sequences of 2D files only.
.IP "-xa"
for directories with several 2D files and several studies, makes dicom2scn attempt to convert
each separate study to a separate SCN file.
.IP "-d"
makes a textual dump of DICOM tags to standard output, instead of converting to SCN. When this
option is used, only one input file can be given/analyzed.
.IP "-r"
writes a conversion report to
.I dicom.txt
.IP "-i"
lists the image sequences on these DICOM files and
some of their properties.
.IP "-n#"
change the treatment of negative values. -n0 will keep negative intensities as given in the
source file. -n1 will set negative values to 0. -n2 will add an offset to all intensities to
make the lowest intensity be 0. If not provided, -n2 is the default behavior. Negative
intensities are only an issue in CT images and some specific MR sequences, such as computed
T2 relaxometry.
.IP "-h, --help"
prints a brief usage help to the console and exits.

.SH LIMITATIONS
It may be common to have multi-study exports, with different
studies in the same file sequence. With no
.B -b
or
.B -e
parameters, dicom2scn will fail with a quite verbose error message
if it crosses the boundary between two studies. The error
message will provide suggestions for
.B -b
and/or
.B -e
study boundaries. dicom2scn requires that slices be
no wider than 2048 pixels.

.SH AUTHORS
dicom2scn was written by Felipe Bergo <bergo@liv.ic.unicamp.br>.
Information about IVS and associated utilities can be found at

.I http://www.liv.ic.unicamp.br/~bergo/ivs

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ivs (1),
.BR ana2scn (1),
.BR scn2ana (1),
.BR scntool (1),
.BR scn (5)
