.TH SCNTOOL 1 "November 2003" IC-Unicamp "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
scntool \- scn volume transformations

.SH SYNOPSIS
.TS
l l.
scntool	\fIinfile\fR [ \fB-v\fR ] [ \fB-o\fI outfile\fR ]
	[ \fB-do\fR [ operation1 operation2 ... ] ]
.TE

.SH DESCRIPTION
scntool performs transformations and conversions on SCN
volume files. It also makes you read a long man page
before you can do anything useful with it.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-do"
indicates the start of the list of operations to be 
performed on the volume.
.IP "-o outfile"
writes the conversion output to
.I outfile
instead of overwriting the input file
.I infile
.IP "-v"
be verbose about the progress of the operations.

.SH OPERATIONS
All left, right, top, bottom, near and far references
assume the user is looking to the XY slices, the
ones with lesser Z coordinate being closer, X
growing to the right, Y growing to the bottom:

.nf
                 _.
  +-------+      /|  growth of Z (near to far)
 /       /|     /    
+-------+ |    +------> growth of X (left to right)
|       | |    |    
|       | |    |    
|       | +    v growth of Y (top to bottom)
|       |/               
+-------+                
.fi

Operation names are case-sensitive, and all angles must be given
in degrees.

.IP "arotx angle"
rotates the volume by an arbitrary angle around the X axis,
rotation direction given by the right hand rule (see rotx).
.IP "aroty angle"
rotates the volume by an arbitrary angle around the Y axis,
rotation direction given by the right hand rule (see rotx).
.IP "arotz angle"
rotates the volume by an arbitrary angle around the Z axis,
rotation direction given by the right hand rule (see rotx).
.IP "autocrop"
crops the volume to the minimum box such that only zero-intensity
voxels are lost.
.IP "autopad"
pads the volume, adding zero-intensity voxels around it, such
that any rotation made with the arot{x,y,z} operators will
keep all voxels within the scene.
.IP "bpv { 8 | 16 }"
changes the bits-per-voxel value of the volume. Valid values
are 8 and 16. Changing a volume's bpv from 16 to 8 will not
normalize voxel intensities, but rather threshold it to the
0--255 range.
.IP "cropx xmin xmax"
crops (cuts) the volume, restricting it to the xmin--xmax
range. You can provide negative values to indicate that you
do not want to cut in that direction (e.g.: cropx 50 -1 will
crop only on the left and not on the right).
.IP "cropy ymin ymax"
crops (cuts) the volume, restricting it to the ymin--ymax
range. Negative values have the same meaning as in cropx.
.IP "cropz zmin zmax"
crops (cuts) the volume, restricting it to the zmin--zmax
range. Negative values have the same meaning as in cropx.
.IP "flipx"
flips volume data on the X axis (left becomes right, and
vice versa).
.IP "flipy"
flips volume data on the Y axis (top becomes bottom, and
vice versa).
.IP "flipz"
flips volume data on the Z axis (near becomes far, and
vice versa).
.IP "info"
prints information about the volume on the standard output.
.IP "isoscale"
applies a voxelsize operation to make the volume isotropic
(dx = dy = dz). It uses the minimum among the current
dx, dy and dz as the new dx, dy and dz.
.IP "normalize min max"
normalizes voxel intensities to the range min--max.
.IP "quit"
terminates scntool without applying the next
filters nor writing the output volume.
.IP "rotx angle"
rotates the volume around the X axis by a multiple of 90 degrees. The
angle parameter must be 90, 180 or 270 (you can provide 0, but it
makes no sense). Rotation direction is given by the right hand
rule (make your right thumb point in the growth direction of the
axis you're rotating around, the other fingers give you the rotation
direction). The rot{x,y,z} operators do not
perform interpolation, and are more accurate than the arot{x,y,z}
operators.
.IP "roty angle"
rotates the volume around the Y axis by a multiple of 90
degrees. Rotation direction is given by the right hand rule (see rotx).
.IP "rotz angle"
rotates the volume around the Z axis by a multiple of 90
degrees. Rotation direction is given by the right hand rule (see rotx).
.IP "swap"
swaps the byte order, possibly fixing a volume file that was
written in big-endian order by accident. Applies to 16-bit
volumes only.
.IP "voxelscale sx sy sz"
interpolates the scene changing the current voxel size from (dx,dy,dz)
to (dx*sx, dy*sy, dz*sz). This is just an alternative way to provide
the parameters to the voxelsize operation.
.IP "voxelsize dx dy dz"
interpolates (scales) the scene to the given voxel size. To keep
the size unchanged in any direction, provide a negative value to
its parameter.

.SH EXAMPLES

Flip heart.scn on the X axis, rotate it 180 degrees around the
Z axis, make it 16-bpv  and write it to out.scn:

.B scntool heart.scn -o out.scn -do flipx rotz 180 bpv 16

Print information about heart.scn and quit without overwriting it:

.B scntool heart.scn -do info quit

Arbitrary rotations, padding the volume before and cropping it
afterwards:

.B scntool heart.scn -o out.scn -do autopad arotx 15 arotz 48 autocrop

Make volume isotropic, 16-bit and normalized in the 0--4095 range:

.B scntool heart.scn -do isoscale bpv 16 normalize 0 4095

.SH DIAGNOSTICS
scntool exits with status code zero if successful,
or with a positive status code otherwise.

.SH AUTHORS
scntool was written by Felipe Bergo <bergo@liv.ic.unicamp.br>. Information
about IVS and associated utilities can be found at

.I http://www.liv.ic.unicamp.br/~bergo/ivs

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ivs (1),
.BR dicom2scn (1),
.BR ana2scn (1),
.BR scn2ana (1),
.BR scn (5)

